Module system introduction changes (#730)
NixOS/nix.dev: source/tutorials/module-system/module-system.md

# The Module System

> Much of the power in Nixpkgs comes from the module system, which provides mechanisms for automatically merging attribute sets, making it easy to compose configurations in a type-safe way.

Author: The module system is not specific to NixOS

> # Deep dive demo: Wrapping the World in Modules

Reviewer: Seems more consistent casing:

```suggestion
# Deep dive demo: Wrapping the world in modules
```

Much of the power in Nixpkgs and NixOS comes from the module system.
It provides mechanisms for conveniently declaring and automatically merging interdependent attribute sets that follow dynamic type constraints, making it easy to express modular configurations.

> In this tutorial you'll learn what a module is and how to define one, what options are and how to declare them, how to express dependencies between modules, and follow extensive demonstration of how to wrap an existing API with Nix modules.

Reviewer: I would break this into a bullet list.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this tutorial you'll learn
- What a module is
- How to define one
- What options are
- How to declare them
- How to express dependencies between modules
and follow extensive demonstration of how to wrap an existing API with Nix modules.
```

Concretely, you'll write modules to interact with the Google Maps API, declaring options which represent map geometry, location pins, and more.

Be prepared to see some Nix errors: during the tutorial, you will first write some *incorrect* configurations, creating opportunities to discuss the resulting error messages and how to resolve them, particularly when discussing type checking.

:::{note}
This tutorial follows [@infinisil](https://github.com/infinisil)'s [presentation on modules](https://infinisil.com/modules.mp4)  [(source)](https://github.com/tweag/summer-of-nix-modules) for 2021 Summer of Nix.
:::

## Empty module

> The simplest module is just a function that takes any attributes and returns empty attribute set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The simplest module is just a function that takes any attributes and returns an empty attribute set.
```

Do this by adding the following new line to `default.nix`:

```diff
# default.nix
+ { lib, ... }:
{

}
```

The addition of this line turns the expression in `default.nix` into a function which takes *at least* one argument, called `lib`, and may accept other arguments (expressed by the ellipsis `...`).

Matching on the `lib` argument will make `nixpkgs` library functions available within the function body.

:::{note}
The ellipsis `...` is necessary because arbitrary arguments can be passed to modules.
:::

## Declaring Options

Modules allow providing *options* that declare which values can be set and used elsewhere.

Options are declared by defining an attribute under the top-level  `options` attribute, using `lib.mkOption`.

In this section, you will define the `generate.script` option.

Change `default.nix` to include the following declaration:

```diff
# default.nix
 { lib, ... }: {

+ options = {
+   generate.script = lib.mkOption {
+     type = lib.types.lines;
+   };
+ };

 }
```

While many attributes for customizing options are available, the most important one is `type`, which specifies which values are valid for an option.

> There are several other types available under [`lib.types`](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/lib/types.nix) in the Nixpkgs library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are several types available under [`lib.types`](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/lib/types.nix) in the Nixpkgs library.
```

       error: A definition for option `generate.script' is not of type `strings concatenated with "\n"'. Definition values:
       - In `/home/nix-user/default.nix': 42
```

This assignment of `generate.script = 42;` caused a type error: integers are not strings concatenated with the newline character.

## Successful Type-checking

To make this module pass the type-checker and successfully evaluate the `generate.script` option, you will now assign a string to `generate.script`.

In this case, you will assign a `map` script which first calls the Google Maps Static API to generate a world map, then displays the result using `icat` (image-cat), both of which are helper scripts.

Update `default.nix` by changing the value of `generate.script` to the following string:

```diff
# default.nix
   config = {
-    generate.script = 42;
+    generate.script = ''
+      map size=640x640 scale=2 | icat
+    '';
   };
```

TODO: Create derivations to get these commands

## Declaring More Options
In this section, you will introduce another option: `generate.requestParams`.

For its type, you should use `listOf <elementType>`, which is a list type where each element must have the specified type.

> Instead of `lines`, in this case you will want the nested type to be `str`, a generic string type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of `lines`, in this case you will want the type of the list elements to be `str`, a generic string type.
```

The difference between `str` and `lines` is in their merging behavior:
Module option types not only check for valid values, but also specify how multiple definitions of an option are to be combined into one.
- For `lines`, multiple definitions get merged by concatenation with newlines.
- For `str`, multiple definitions are not allowed. This is not a problem here, since one can't define a list element multiple times.

> Make the following additions to your `default.nix` file now:

Reviewer: Or whenever you have time :smile: 

```suggestion
Make the following additions to your `default.nix` file:
```

+      "scale=2"
+    ];
   };

 }
```

## Dependencies Between Options

A given module generally only declares a single option that is meant to be evaluated.

This option generates the final result to be used elsewhere, which in this case is `generate.script`.

Options can depend on other options, making it possible to build more useful abstractions.

Here, we want the `generate.script` option to use the values of `generate.requestParams` as arguments to the `map` command.

### Accessing Option Values
To make an option definition available, the argument of the module accessing it must include the `config` attribute.

Update `default.nix` to add the `config` attribute:
```diff
# default.nix
-{ lib, ... }: {
+{ lib, config, ... }: {
```

> When a module setting options is evaluated, these values can be accessed by their corresponding attribute names.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a module that sets options is evaluated, these values can be accessed by their corresponding attribute names.
```

Reviewer: But I don't find this sentence very clear anyway.

Now make the following changes to `default.nix`:

```diff
# default.nix
   config = {
     generate.script = ''
-      map size=640x640 scale=2 | icat
+      map ${lib.concatStringsSep " "
+            config.generate.requestParams
+           } | icat
     '';
```

Here, the value of the `config.generate.requestParams` attribute is populated by the module system based on the definitions in the same file.

> This is possible due to lazy evaluation in the Nix language.

Reviewer: In which way is laziness responsible here?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Lazy evaluation in the Nix language allows taking a value from the `config` argument passed to the module which defines the value.
```

> `lib.concatStringsSep " "` is then used to join each list element from the value of `config.generate.requestParams` into a single string, with the list elements of `requestParams` separated by a space character.

Reviewer: This is explaining plain Nix code, which might not be necessary.

Reviewer 2: It's never wrong to explain it yet another time to avoid people frenetically searching for docs.

+        })\"")
     ];
   };
```

This time, you've used `escapeShellArg` to pass the `config.map.center` value as a command-line argument to `geocode`, interpolating the result back into the `requestParams` string which sets the `center` value.

Wrapping shell command execution in Nix modules is a helpful technique for controlling system changes, using the more ergonomic attributes and values interface rather than dealing with the peculiarities of escaping manually.

## Splitting Modules

> The module schema includes the `imports` attribute, which allows incorporating further modules, for example to split a large configuration into multiple files.

Reviewer: What's schema here?

> The module schema includes the `imports` attribute, which allows incorporating further modules, for example to split a large configuration into multiple files.

Reviewer: What's schema here?

```suggestion
The module schema includes the `imports` attribute, which allows evaluating other modules, for example to split a large configuration into multiple files.
```

> In particular, this allows you to separate option declarations from where they are used in your configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In particular, this allows you to separate option declarations from definition, i.e. the place where they are used in your configuration.
```

+        })\"")
     ];
   };
```

This time, you've used `escapeShellArg` to pass the `config.map.center` value as a command-line argument to `geocode`, interpolating the result back into the `requestParams` string which sets the `center` value.

Wrapping shell command execution in Nix modules is a helpful technique for controlling system changes, using the more ergonomic attributes and values interface rather than dealing with the peculiarities of escaping manually.

## Splitting Modules

> The module schema includes the `imports` attribute, which allows incorporating further modules, for example to split a large configuration into multiple files.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [module schema](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/#sec-writing-modules) includes the `imports` attribute, which allows incorporating further modules, for example to split a large configuration into multiple files.
```

         let
```

> In this case, the default behavior of the Maps API when not passed a center or zoom level is to pick the geometric center of all the given markers, and to set a zoom level appropriate for viewing all markers at once.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, the default behavior of the Google Maps API when not passed a center or zoom level is to pick the geometric center of all the given markers, and to set a zoom level appropriate for viewing all markers at once.
```

Reviewer: But also: is this relevant?

## Nested Submodules

> It's time to introduce a `users` option with the `lib.types.attrsOf <subtype>` type, which will allow you to define `users` as an attribute set with arbitrary keys, each value of which has type `<subtype>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's time to introduce a `users` option with type `lib.types.attrsOf <subtype>`, which will allow you to define `users` as an attribute set, whose values have type `<subtype>`.
```

       (lib.length config.map.markers >= 1)
```

The `config.users` attribute set is passed to `attrValues`, which returns a list of values of each of the attributes in the set (here, the set of `config.users` you've defined), sorted alphabetically.

The `departure` values of each of the `users` are then joined into a list, and this list is filtered for non-`null` locations.

The resulting list is stored in `map.markers`.

The resulting `map.markers` option then propagates to the `generate.requestParams` option, which in turn is used to generate arguments to the script which ultimately calls the Maps API.

Defining the options in this way allows you to set multiple `users.<name>.departure.location` values and generate a map with the appropriate zoom and center, with pins corresponding to the set of `departure.location` values for *all* `users`.

In the 2021 Summer of Nix, this formed the basis of an interactive multi-person map demo.

## Labeling Markers

Now that the map can be rendered with multiple markers, it's time to add some style customization.

To tell the markers apart, you should add another option to the `markerType` submodule, to allow labeling each marker pin.

> The API [states](https://developers.google.com/maps/documentation/maps-static/start#MarkerStyles) that these labels must be either an uppercase letter or a number.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The API documentation states that [these labels must be either an uppercase letter or a number](https://developers.google.com/maps/documentation/maps-static/start#MarkerStyles).
```

> You can implement this with the `strMatching "<regex>"` type, where `<regex>` is a regular expression used for the matching; this will reject any unacceptable (non-uppercase letter or number) values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can implement this with the `strMatching "<regex>"` type, where `<regex>` is a regular expression that will accept any matching (uppercase letter or number) values.
```

+      (lib.concatMap (user: [
+        user.departure
+      ]) (lib.attrValues config.users));

     map.center = lib.mkIf
       (lib.length config.map.markers >= 1)
```

The `config.users` attribute set is passed to `attrValues`, which returns a list of values of each of the attributes in the set (here, the set of `config.users` you've defined), sorted alphabetically.

The `departure` values of each of the `users` are then joined into a list, and this list is filtered for non-`null` locations.

The resulting list is stored in `map.markers`.

The resulting `map.markers` option then propagates to the `generate.requestParams` option, which in turn is used to generate arguments to the script which ultimately calls the Google Maps API.

Defining the options in this way allows you to set multiple `users.<name>.departure.location` values and generate a map with the appropriate zoom and center, with pins corresponding to the set of `departure.location` values for *all* `users`.

In the 2021 Summer of Nix, this formed the basis of an interactive multi-person map demo.

## Labeling Markers

> Now that the map can be rendered with multiple markers, it's time to add some style customization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that the map can be rendered with multiple markers, it's time to add some style customizations.
```

               })"
```

Here, the label for each `marker` is only propagated to the CLI parameters if `marker.style.label` is set.

## Defining a Default Label

> In case you don't want to manually define a label for every marker, you can set a default value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case you don't want to manually define a label for each marker, you can set a default value.
```

> The easiest value for a default label is the username, which will always also be set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The easiest value for a default label is the username, which will always be set.
```

       };
     };
-  };
```

In this case, you don't easily have access to the name from the marker submodules `label` option, where you otherwise could set a `default` value.

Instead you can use the `config` section of the `user` submodule to set a default, like so:

```diff
# marker.nix
+
+    config = {
+      departure.style.label = lib.mkDefault
+        (firstUpperAlnum name);
+    };
+  });

 in {

```

:::{note}
Module options have a *precedence*, represented as an integer, which determines the priority of setting the option to a particular value.

The `lib.mkDefault` modifier sets the precedence of its argument value to 1000, the lowest priority.

This ensures that other values set for the same option will prevail.
:::

## Marker Styling: Color

For better visual contrast, it would also be helpful to have a way to change the *color* of a marker.

Here you will use two new type-functions for this:

> - `either <this> <that>`, which takes two types as arguments, allows either of them

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `either <this> <that>`, which takes two types as arguments, and allows either of them
```

> - `enum [ <allowed values> ]`, which takes a list of allowed values

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `enum [ <allowed values> ]`, which takes a list of allowed values, and allows any of them
```

       };
     };
-  };
```

In this case, you don't easily have access to the name from the marker submodules `label` option, where you otherwise could set a `default` value.

Instead you can use the `config` section of the `user` submodule to set a default, like so:

```diff
# marker.nix
+
+    config = {
+      departure.style.label = lib.mkDefault
+        (firstUpperAlnum name);
+    };
+  });

 in {

```

:::{note}

> Module options have a *precedence*, represented as an integer, which determines the priority of setting the option to a particular value.

Reviewer: Lowest precedence wins, right? Could be worth mentioning.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Module options have a *precedence*, represented as an integer, which determines the priority of setting the option to a particular value.
When merging values, the lowest precedence wins.
```

               })"
```

## Marker Styling: Size

> In case you set many different markers, it would be helpful to have the ability to change their size individually, further improving visual accessibility.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In case you set many different markers, it would be helpful to have the ability to change their size individually.
```

+      };
     };
   };
```

> Now add a handler for the size parameter in `paramForMarker`, which selects an appropriate string to pass to the API:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now add a mapping for the size parameter in `paramForMarker`, which selects an appropriate string to pass to the API:
```

         "$(geocode ${lib.escapeShellArg loc})";
```

:::{warning}

> Don't confuse the `map` function with the `map` option or the `map` script!

Reviewer 2: Needs an explanation of what's what

         in "path=${
```

## Further Styling

> To further improve the aesthetics of the rendered map, you should add another style option allowing paths to be drawn as *geodesics*, the shortest "as the crow flies" distance between two points on Earth.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that you've got this far, to further improve the aesthetics of the rendered map, you should add another style option allowing paths to be drawn as *geodesics*, the shortest "as the crow flies" distance between two points on Earth.
```

         in "path=${
```

## Wrapping Up
In this tutorial, you've learned how to write custom Nix modules to bring external services under declarative control, with the help of several new utility functions from the Nixpkgs `lib`.

You defined several modules in multiple files, each with separate submodules making use of the module system's type checking.

> These modules exposed features of the external API in a declarative way.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These modules exposed features of the external API in a declarative way.

You can now conquer the world with Nix.
```
